# Computer Architecture 

Before understanding system design, we must look at how computers operate because the way an application's components communicate is similar to how components of a computer communicate.

## Computer Components

### 1. Disk

The disk is the primary storage unit of a computer. It contains every file, folder and application on your computer, even when your computer is turned off. This makes the disk a **persistent** memory. 

Some examples of disks are Hard Disk Drives (HDDs) and Solid-State Drives (SSDs). SSDs are much faster but cost more.

These days disk sizes vary in the TB ranges.


### 2. Random Access Memory (RAM)

RAM is another type of memory that stores the data of your running processes. Every application you run, every tab you keep open and every variable you allocate in your code is stored in the RAM. This is where data that won't be persisted but should be easy to access is stored, making RAM a **volatile** memory. Your RAM is empty when you computer is turned off.

Compared to the disk, RAM has much less memory (1-128 GB) but reading from and writing to RAM is much faster than memory. There will be a comparison at the end (I promise).

**Note:** RAM is usually referred to as 'memory' even though disk is also a type of memory. Disk is referred to as 'disk', obviously.

We talked about reading and writing on these components, but not about who does these input/output (I/O) operations.


### 3. Central Processing Unit (CPU)

CPU is the brain of the operation. It is responsible for performing I/O operations on memories. Other components cannot perform I/O operations, hence they cannot communicate data with each other without the CPU.

Besides interacting with the RAM and the disk, CPU is also responsible for running every calculation and logical operation. When you want to run your code, it is translated into a set of binary instructions which is stored on the RAM. CPU executes these instructions by manipulating data stored elsewhere in RAM or on disk.

Besides RAM and the disk, CPU also has a much smaller storage that it uses for much faster memory access.

### 4. Cache

There are L1, L2 and L3 caches which are also physical storage components on the same die as the CPU.

**Side Note:** Typically integrated circuits are developed in batches on a wafer. Think of a large circle (wafer) that has many small circuits on it. This circle is then cut up (diced) into smaller pieces with each piece containing one of the circuits. Each piece is called a 'die'.

The cache's size is in the kB-MB range, so it is much smaller than RAM. Everytime the CPU retrieves some data from the RAM or the disk, it stores it in its cache along with where it got it from. When the CPU needs to retrieve the same data, it checks the cache first because accessing it is MUCH faster. If the data in question is present in the cache, the CPU gets to save a lot of time.

Caching is an important concept beyond computer architecture. It is crucial in networks of components that frequently communicate with each other. The internet is a great example. 
- Your browser caches sites you frequently visit so it can load the page faster. 
- CDNs (more on that later) cache the resources accessed from a certain region so that others from the same region can access that resource faster.

I promised a comparison so here it is:

| - | Disk | RAM | Cache
| ---| ---| --- | ---
| I/O Speed  | $10^{-3}$$\frac{s}{access}$ | $10^{-9}$$\frac{s}{access}$| $10^{-9}$$\frac{s}{access}$
| Storage | 1-100 TB | 1-128 GB | kB - MB range

The speed at which the CPU accesses each memory increases as the storage size decreases. Of course, the size of the storage isn't the only factor that determines I/O speed. Their internal architecture and how data is stored in each memory plays an important factor too but that is beyond the scope of this note.

There can be many more components in a computer (GPU, input devices, power supply, motherboard, etc.). Nevertheless these 4 are the backbone of each computer and are must-haves. We will see that applications also have components that have similar roles as the CPU and the memories.