# Application Architecture

The term 'application' takes different meanings from the user's and the developer's perspective. 

For the developer, the application is a *server* running a *program* that serves content from a *persistent storage*. The storage is most likely a *database* and the server accesses it through a *network*.

The user uses a *client*, usually a *web browser*, to request the server for the HTML, CSS and JavaScript files that will bring the application UI to life. Though it is not the user's concern, having many clients access the server at the same time can overload the server. Therefore, we need to **scale** the server.

## Scaling

There are two types of scaling: vertical and horizontal

In **vertical scaling** the goal is to make the server running our application stronger so it can handle more requests. The client still access the same server but the server's hardware has improved. From a networking perspective, this is a great solution to handle more users. However, we can upgrade our hardware up until the latest technologies allow us. Therefore, this method is not sustainable for large scale applications. 

**Note:** Do not discredit vertical scaling. Sometimes, simple apps can meet their demand requirements by vertical scaling. A notable example is Amazon Prime Video that migrated from a microservice architecture to monolithic architecture.

In **horizontal scaling** another server with the same hardware is booted up to handle client requests. This way, we get multiple servers handling requests and anytime the servers are overloaded another server can be started up until we hit a budget limit. However, this brings a lot more engineering responsibilities;
1. Our application is now running on multiple IP addresses, how will the servers share the load? How will the user know where to go?
2. If a user complains that the app is down, how will we know which server has issues? How will we know it is a server issue? 
3. Is waiting for the user to complain the best way to handle issues?

These are valid questions with industry-standard answers.


## Loadbalancers

Loadbalancers are used to direct users to a set a of servers while making sure each server gets roughly the same amount of load. Loadbalancers work with varying balancing algorithms.
- Directing to each server in order (round-robin)
- Keeping track of each server's CPU/RAM utilization and always choosing the least occupied one.
- Give weights to each server based on their response times, open connections or resource-usages and pick a random one based on these weights.

From the user's perspective, they are always going to the same address (the loadbalancer) and getting redirected to an appropriate server. This component of the application makes sure that server's share the load and the client gets to enjoy the ride.


## Logging, Metrics and Alarms

Logs are notes written down by the application when something notable occurs like an error. They provide insight into what went wrong as something went horribly wrong. Although it they are mostly text, it is best practice to keep logs in a seperate *log server*. Logs are helpful but fail to provide the complete picture. If the problem was related to resource usages or network traffic, we would need a **metrics service**.

Metrics are quantitative measurements of the server's running environment. They include network traffic, resource utilizations, number of running servers, etc. Metrics can also be produced by the application's flows; counting how many times a specific request has failed or whether a specific service is being requested suspiciously too many times. Metrics let us now when the server's are overloaded but it would be a hassle to constantly monitor the metrics for a traffic spike. Introducing: **alarms**. 

Alarms are triggers that let the developers know when a metric gets past a threshold. This could be CPU utilization alarms that notify us when to scale the servers or service failure alarms suggesting a specific service has failed to response too many times. Alarms can be shown on dashboards, emails or however the developers can learn about the failure the fastest.


## Closing Notes

A lot goes into monitoring an application and having it consistently serve its users. This has been a introduction to how an application is structures but a lot more goes into how these components communicate. More on that in the upcoming lessons.