# Networking Intro

A network is comprised of devices that communicate with each other using a set of protocols. Think of these protocols as ingredient options for a burger. To make a burger you would pick options for these **layers**;
- The bread (white, whole, etc.)
- The kind of meat (beef, chicken)
- The vegetables (lettuce, tomato, pickles)
- The sauce (ketchup, mayo, etc.)

Similarly, communication over a network is made possible by the 7 OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) layers:
1. Physical Layer
2. Data Link Layer
5. Session Layer
3. Network Layer
4. Transport Layer
6. Presentation Layer
7. Application Layer

What makes OSI layers and burgers similar is that you can pick any option for a layer and this decision would not affect other layers. The option you pick for the transport layer would only affect whatever the transport layer is responsible for.

Each layer of a network has at least a semester's worth of content if you really want to dig into it. Thankfully, developers don't need to know all of it. Networking is a vast topic but only a small portion of it concerns developers. The following 3 lessons are about this small portion. Leave the rest to network engineers and pray for them.

## IP Addresses

Each device in a network is assigned an IP address. There are different types of IP addresses and the most popular ones are IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. And IPv4 address is a 32 bit number. Here is an example:

10101010111100001111111100001000

The 32 bits are partitioned into 4 sections of 8 bits. 

10101010 - 11110000 - 11111111 - 00001000

Each section is converted into decimals

170 - 240 - 255 - 8

Finally the decimals are delimited by dots '.' and 
*voila*

`170.240.255.8`

In total, there can be 4.3 billion unique IPv4 addresses. IPv4 is still widely used in smaller networks. However, 4.3 billion is not nearly enough to give each device on the internet a unique address. 

IPv6 uses 128 bits which yields 340 undecillion ($10^{36}$) unique addresses and they look like this: `9f0c:5ce2:a90d:8b5a:bd26:2adb:0c4d:8eef`. It uses hexadecimals instead of decimals and there are 8 sections of 16 bits. You can guess how they are made.

Now that we have addresses, devices now know **where** to send their information but not **how** to send it. 


## Sending Data Across the Network

Sending raw data to the network would be equivalent to shouting from your window and hoping the right neighbor hears you. A better approach would be to call out their name, say who you are and THEN say what you want to say. Similar to shouting, devices send their data in **packets**. Packets are structured with a **header**, **data** (AKA payload) and **trailer**.
- Header: Contains information ABOUT the information in the 'data' section, also known as *meta-data*. Some examples are the source and target of the packet and the size of the data. 
- Data: Contains the raw data. Most of what developers are concerned about.
- Trailer: Contains information that helps validate the integrity of the received data. Not our concern in this lesson.

For the sake of this lesson, the types of information stored in the header can be seperated to two: IP header and TCP header. 

### IP Header

The IP header contains IP addresses of the sender and the recipient. If anyone besides the intended recipient receives the packet, they would know to route the packet elsewhere or ignore it.


### TCP Header
The understand the reason for the TCP header you should know that the chronological order of the data sent might not match the order of the received data. 

If the device has to send a large packet, it would divide it into smaller packets and some of these smaller packets may arrive slower than the packets sent after them or be lost along the way due to interferences. 

Imagine that as you are shouting to your blind friend across the street a car passes by and your friend doesn't hear the middle of your sentence. Since they couldn't see the car passing by, they wouldn't have the means of knowing that the sentence they heard from you has missing information. This is where the TCP header comes in. 

The TCP header contains information that the recipient can use to identify missing packets or order the packets it received. If the packets arrived in the order of 1 -> 3 -> 2, the recipient can order them themselves. If they received 1 -> 3, they would know that packet #1 is missing and ask the source to repeat themselves. 


Now we know how data can be sent to our intended recipient and make sure that each packet is reliably delivered to the recipient. Physically sending the data is the responsibility of the physical layer (first layer) but it is beyond the scope of this lesson.


## Common Networking Terms

### Private vs Public Networks

To access a device on a network, your device has to be operational with an IP address to be used only in that network. A device in network A cannot *directly* send packets to a device in network B. There has to be a device that is connected to both network A and B. A device that is connected to multiple networks can have multiple IP addresses to be used in the respective networks. This is similar to having your friends call you with a nickname and your family call you with your real name. Having said that, when we refer to **public** networks we are most likely referring to **the internet**. 

Here is the kicker, your PC is (most probably) not *directly* connected to the internet. It is connected to an internet **modem** that routes your requests to the internet for you (don't ask the difference between a router and a modem. Some modern modems have integrated routers in them). The devices connected to your modem form a **private** network and the modem itself serves as the *gateway* to the internet, AKA the public network. In summary;
- Your modem and the devices conncted to it form a private network and they all have private IP addresses. 
- Your modem also has a public IP address that it uses to communicate with other devices connected to the internet.
- When you search for something on the internet; your request goes to the modem, the modem asks the relevant server in the internet whatever your asked for, gets a response and redirects your computer whatever it received.

I gave this example to explain the distinction between private and public networks. A private network can be servers in a data center, the computers at a LAN party, your office network, all the phones connected to the airport's free Wi-Fi (not recommended), etc. The main difference is in the range of their accessibility.


### Static vs Dynamic IP Addresses

Devices can be automatically assigned a different (dynamic) IP address every time a connection to a network is formed (e.g. the modem assigns you a new private IP address every time you connect to it) or it can be manually configured to be the exact same (static) IP. 

Usually, clients get dynamic IP allocation while servers get a static IP.


### Ports

If a single device is running multiple applications/services, how will another device accessing this IP specify which service it is trying to access? Imagine you live in an apartment flat and told your friend the exact coordinates (X and Y) of your house. How will your friend know which floor and flat your are in? Think of ports as a more granular address information. 

Ports come at the end of IP addresses and a device may have up to 65535 ports, this is more than enough. If you host a website on port 100 and open an email service on port 2100, a requester would need to access port 100 to see the website and port 2100 to send an email. These would be different addresses on the same IP address. Example: `192.19.121.28:100` and `192.19.121.28:2100`.