# TCP & UDP

The transport layer of the OSI layers determines the transportation method of a communication. There are only two widely used transport protocols to date: TCP and UDP.

## TCP

Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) enforces reliable transmission of data. The packets are enumerated so they can be ordered by the receiver and even if some are lost, the receiver gets to ask for the dropped packets so we can resend them.

TCP starts with a 3-way handshake where we;

1. initiate a connection
2. receive an acknowledgement
3. send back another acknowledgement

It is more detailed than that but as a developer you don't need to know it.

TCP also enumerates each packet so the receiver can know when there is a missing packet. For example, if packets 1 and 3 are received, they can know that 2 was dropped and ask for it again. Furthermore, since packets are numbered, it doesn't matter if some packets are delivered out of order because the receiver will know how to correctly order them.

TCP is used in scenarios where efficiency and reliability are the priority. Common usecases are file transfers, web browsing and email.

## UDP

User Datagram Protocol (UDP) prioritizes speed over reliability. It does not care if packets are lost are delivered out of order. It sends new packets as soon as they are available.

UDP is used when speed is the priority and dropping a packet or two is not a concern. Common usecases are live-streaming and video games.

## Conclusion

We use TCP if;

- We have to make sure the packets reach the destination.
- The packets have to be interpreted in order.

We use UDP if;

- Data has to be delivered fast.
- We don't care if some packets are lost.
